And we almost picked her back up within a month, but
the weather got bad. Where was this? This was right
south of here, about 125 miles, something like
that. 4,500 feet of water. Gee whiz. Yeah, so the
next year they went back and picked her up, brought
her in, and refurbished her. Alvin's like
grandfather's ax, three new heads and four new
handles, but it's still a good ax. You
know, she's... They have a new hole in her now, a
titanium hole, so she can go to 12,000 feet. Right.
That was the next question I was going to ask you.
Her original depth was 6,000 feet, and there was
some criticism about the fact this wasn't deep
enough to do things like the Atlanta Church. Yeah,
right. That's true. Actually, we sort of... Well,
people are often too conservative because...
Those spheres turned out we could have gone to 15,
well, we probably could have gone to 12,000 feet in
those spheres with a safety factor of one and a
quarter to one and a third, because it looked like
all the tests showed that they would be good to
15,000 or 16,000 feet before they collapsed. We
took them down to, one of them we were going to test
and collapse in Southwest Research, and we took it
down there and the tank blew up instead of, The top
blew off the tank. So that ended that test. We just,
from then on, knew we had something that was good.
We never could quite shake loose the 6,000-foot
mark. We could have gone deeper. We'd had to change
the variable balance system, though. That was one
major change. If we really wanted to go much
deeper, we'd have had to do it. That's the pump that
pumps water in and out to keep your trim right. And
it would have worked about 7,500 feet, and that
would have been the limit. So that would have been
it. Yeah, the Neuse Hall works fine. One of those is
the sister hall has been tested to something like
22,000 feet, you see. So we're back again being
very super cautious. And with a submarine where
you're bottom limited. I mean, if you don't go in
water that's deeper than your, that's a little bit
more shallow than your crush depth, you're in
pretty good shape. unless there's an atomic
explosion or something like that. In that case, it
really doesn't make any sense. That's right. Then
I think the Alvin will not be our primary concern.
It won't be our primary concern,
that's right. But it's really this 12,000 feet
expansion that allows them to do the work that
helps to verify deep sea spreading. Right, and
then they get into the rifts and the valleys and so
on. Now, you can't, you know, there's always a
deeper place to go. Yeah. 15,000 feet would be
better than 12,000 feet. A lot of the ocean is
15,000 feet, you know, 5,000 meters deep. And
12,000 feet doesn't get you to a lot of the flat
places in the ocean. Of course, in some way,
they're not as interesting
as the places where it's wiggly. Of course, in the
valleys and the deeps, why, you have to go much
deeper. So it doesn't make much difference. Okay.
So now, then, after your work on the Alvin, next
year then, chairman of the department, right?
Yeah. Okay. Well, I was chairman, yeah, that's
basically it. In 62, I guess, we formed the
department. Now, so, what sort of new ideas did you
try to bring into the department in 62? Oh,
actually, I didn't really try to do much at all.
Well, we got into the computer business. We didn't
have a really big computer. So in between 62 and 66
we got into the computer business. We had to hire
people and get the computer system set up and get a
computer. And we changed computers once from a
GE-225 to a Sigma-7. That was a, you know, that's
another busy work. It's fairly straightforward,
but it takes lots of time to do things like that.
reasonably important to the department. Right.
Well, to the whole institution. Yeah, right. See,
this is the whole institution. The other thing we
did, we got into chipboard computers and computer
systems to use on our ships, which was really
started by Carl Bowen here. He was the first person
to really, well, that may not quite be true. I think
Rocky Miller was one of the first to put a computer
on a ship, too. I don't quite remember the dates. To
have a thing that was sort of a standard piece of the
ship's operating gear is now the way we operate.
It's unusual for the ships to go out without one of
our HP 2100s on it. They're all operated through
the department. Do you have any prior experience
in computers? No. So then what you're looking for
is a computer man, so to speak, to bring into your
department. That's what we did, right. That's not
a problem now, of course, but that's what we were
looking at. But it should have been a problem then.
It was more of a problem. Well, first we brought in a
guy who was a computer person and not much of a
manager. He knew computers well, and he knew
programming well. But when you set up an
organization like that that ends up with 25 to 30
people, the man at the top has to be also a manager.
It's more important that he knows what you're
trying to do, and how to get people to do things, and
what people to use and not to use, and have somebody
that knows all about the technology and
everything else sort of dribbles and goes in
different directions. Yeah, it really is.
Management's an important thing, and anything
that involves more than 10 or 15 people, I think,
really becomes important. So it worked well. We
have our Sigma-7, and we have, I think, In the
institution, there's at least 14 of these HPs, of
which four or five belong to the shipboard
computer group. And we're continually changing
it because the technology is changing. And it
seems desirable to keep in step with the
technology and try to keep up with it anyhow. It's
just like these little hand computers you get
these days, huh? Incredible. Incredible. They
really are incredible. They really are
incredible. I might have been a scientist if I had
one of those when I was young. I couldn't pass
physics. I couldn't do the math. So primarily
the transition to the computer then that takes
place, and the computer goes on the shipboard for
the first time. Were you sort of amazed at the sort
of data and work the computer could do on the
shipboard, or did you anticipate that? work that a
computer can do to start with. It doesn't make much
difference whether it's on a ship or not. No, they
really are amazing things. Yes, they are.
Nowadays, it's just really nifty what people can
do with them. This changes the whole idea of what
you can do with data. You can look at it, and process
it, and pull it apart, and look at frequency
spectrum, and everything you want to, and just
fantastic detail. Really different.
There would, for example, have been no modeling
with those computers. That would be very
difficult. Well, people did try to model things,
but they did it analytically with equations,
numerical equations, and things like that. And it
just took time, lots of time. When you get into
certain integrals that you have to do
numerically, that you can't get solutions for,
then you have to have lots of people sitting and
punching calculators and adding little things
and bits together. Wipes out the problem, right?
Weather modeling or oceanographic modeling, any
of this stuff is based upon the computers. Of
course, the good ideas are hard to come by. The
original solid ideas of what to do are probably the
most important thing. And not many people have
those great ideas. And then it takes a long time to
really prove them or disprove them. I think in any
field this is true.
So were there any particular problems as chairman
of the department? No, standard people problems.
You have all those all different kinds. No, we
didn't have any terrible problems that I know of.
At least if they did, they kept them quiet. And then
after chairmanship of the department? So you were
62 to what, 67? In the applied oceanography, to 66.
Then I was chairman of the geology and geophysics
team, 66 through 69. And of course, I'd been
associated with that group before I went into the
submarine business. And I had stayed associated
with them a reasonable amount during that time. So
it wasn't any big shock to come back to that group.
OK. Now that anticipates the next question. Has
the group changed or anything that you were Any
sort of surprises that came to you by the time you
returned back to your original work? No, I don't
think so. No. We were just doing a lot more. We'd
grown. Don't forget, this is during the period
I've been here has been the big growth rate of
oceanography. And everything got bigger and
better. And we went through the big ships. We got
our first big ship chain in 58 or 9, I think it was.
59, I guess it was. And before that, sort of the
biggest ship we'd use had been the Yamacraw we had
from the Coast Guard for a year and a half, for two
years. And we were doing our acoustic work from it,
some cruises into the Mediterranean and back. And
that was a big change for the institution, because
we started, before they'd run, well, the Atlantis
was the largest ship they had, and it was quite
small compared to the Just not enough room or not
enough electrical power to do all the things we do
today.
That was interesting. Then we got chain. Then we
got Atlantis II. And then eventually NOR came
along. And so the whole picture grew about the
seagoing capability of the institution. When I
first came here, we had Crawford. which is a
125-foot Coast Guard cutter, the Bear, which is
about a 70, 80-foot sort of tuggish boat, and the
Alanis. And then we used the Amicron. That was the
fleet then, but now you see we're operating, well,
we're connected with Sea Probe now, and we're
connected with NOR, Alanis II, and Oceanis. plus
salvin and lulut. So our green thing has really
grown. It's enormous. It's a big business.
But no major problems. Well, seafloor spreading,
the idea of seafloor spreading was starting. And
people were getting interested in that. And the
definition of the ridges, you know, the hazing
that worked out of the structure of the bottom of
the earth. We began to see this structure. the ties
together with the seafloor spreading, the
tectonic motion. It all made an interesting
picture.
And so, and then you remained as chairman of the
department until? 69. 69, and then? Then I went to
Italy for two years as deputy director of the
Sackland Center over there. Okay. Tell me about
that. Oh, that was neat. Well, it's a NATO
organization of, they have a total of about 200
people. And they're called ASW Center, and their
work is to look at problems in finding submarines
for the NATO countries. And people are there from
13 different countries, I believe. They have a
staff of 50 scientist posts. And usually nine of
these are from the United States, and the rest are
from other NATO countries. It's located in La
Spezia, which is up in the northwest coast of
Italy, just beginning the lovely Cote d'Azur.
It's a very lovely place to live. And the little
town where we lived was Lerici, and that was nice. a
different world. You're in a different
environment. It's very interesting. The work is
good. They do quite good work over there. All the
people are picked out very carefully that go
there. It's just a heck of an interesting place to
be. How were you chosen as deputy director? What
was your conduct? Well, just from the work I'd done
with ONR. You know, I knew a lot of people in the
office. All the people that go there from the U.S.
go through the Office of Naval Research. And of
course, We'd been doing business with Office of
Naval Research ever since I came to Woods Hole. So I
knew a lot of the people down there. And they were
looking for a deputy director. And he had to have
worked in acoustics and know something about
management and things like that. And so I sort of
fit the bill. And they asked me if I'd like to go. And
I said, sure. Yeah, you bet, huh? Right. So it was
very nice. And it was a terminal two-year
appointment, like most of those . Well, typically
it's supposed to be three years. But I decided that
two years is enough. And the institution has a
policy which the two years of leave of absence is
sort of a limit. I could have probably gotten it for
three years. But it seemed like two years was long
enough to go away. You have a house and things like
that back here. It's a long time. It seemed short
then, too, actually, the way time goes. I think
it's interesting to do something like that,
because it's different than taking a visit. You go
to a foreign country and you visit there for a
while. You don't really learn the people, learn
the language, and get a feel for what the people are
like. That makes it very different, I think.
And we don't regret that at all. When you returned
back then to Woods Hole. Yeah, right. And then what
did you begin to do? Then I became department
chairman of ocean engineering. Because right at
that time, Scott Dobbin was leaving. So this thing
was open. I'd essentially done it before, so
that's what happened.
Started out working on, well, we got involved with
some things for the Navy, another acoustics
problem. I had started before I left, but Scott
carried on, and then I took back over again. And
that involved doing some work for the Navy, mostly
classified work.
The acoustic group at that time was in the geology
and geophysics department, the way it was when I
left. So it moved over into applied oceanography.
So it's into ocean engineering. So it's an ocean
engineering now. We just carried on, continued to
do more of the same. It's different all the time,
but in one way it's the same. So it's really fun.
Now, I have some questions I want to ask you about
funding now, the next series of questions. The
nature of funding in oceanography has changed. It
seems to be it's becoming more and more towards
applied oceanography and ocean engineering. It
seems like funds are more available there than
they are for, I hate to use the term, basic research
in science. What's your feelings about that? Does
that seem accurate? Are you opposed to it? Support
it? Well, I don't really know that it's true in the
first place.
I'm not so sure. There's very few people who do
basic research, actually.
Most people are solving puzzles of one kind or
another, and they're not having really great new
ideas or anything like that. They're sort of
putting giant jigsaw puzzles together.
If it's a difficult puzzle, I don't see where it
makes much difference whether it's all applied or
basic or what it is in that respect. And there's
been a lot more talk about doing that sort of thing.
But if you look at the money that's being spent, I
think if you really do some of the sums, the basic
part isn't doing badly at all in terms of funding.
Funding is not kept up with inflation. And the
number of people doing the work has increased a
great deal. So it makes the competition a lot
harder. Back in the early 60s, the number of people
doing oceanography or oceanographically
related things, there weren't very many places
you could go do that. And now there are a lot. And of
course, if you look at the total amount of money
going into that type of work, it's appreciably
more than it was then. I'm not quite sure how it
relates if you put in all the inflation factors.
Well, it's still more because there's more people
doing it. Just look at the institution. We've
grown from, what was it, 350 people when I came to
something like 850 now. And there are other places
that have come up around the country that when we
started were zero. So that money is coming from
somewhere, whether you talk about dollars. If you
talk about man years, why, there are many more now
than there were then. So I'm not sure what the real
numbers are when you look at it that way.
People talk about it because that's the way
Congress likes to hear it, I guess. Anybody hates
to spend their money and say, well, I don't really
know what this is for. You probably don't even do
that.
And the ocean engineering, I think they're
probably, it's very difficult. Well, I don't know
whether it is or not. It's reasonably difficult
these days to get money for equipment
developments. People don't like to buy the
equipment. Yet the equipment is what makes a lot of
these experiments go. The technology is what
makes a lot of these things go. And unless you
develop it, you're not going to progress very far.
But that's a hard one to sell a lot of people. And
there is a lot of money sometimes wasted on
developing technology that never does anything.
So it's a matter of picking out the right people and
saying, what do you think needs to be developed? Do
it, then. That's the way you have to do it. And
that's hard to do in any simple structure, I think.
What's your impression of the Sea Grant program?
Was it a good idea or a bad idea? How did it affect
you? Oh, it gave me a lot of agony because I going to
be Sea Grant director here back in 70, when was it,
two, as well as being department chairman when
they first came. And they said they had a bit of
money, and we should build up this big proposal. So
we worked hard getting this big proposal
together, and then they didn't have any money at
all. That's the only sour taste I have about Sea
Grant. And that really wasn't their fault. No, I
think it's been a good program. I think they're
doing some good things around the country for a
very practical sense. You know, they're supposed
to be somewhat similar to the land grant,
developing the sea for use. If you read, do you read
many of their brochures that come out? They're
doing things that help fishermen, help people
that work along the edges, things like that, which
is very good. I haven't followed it very closely,
just because I haven't been personally involved
in it too much. It's sort of looking at it from the
outside. We have some people in our department
that have had Sea Grant proposals and so on. But I
haven't been involved in any of them myself,
particularly the last quite a few years.
There always tends to be the reaction, well, if it
isn't done at one of the big places, it's not going
to be as good work as if it's done somewhere else.
That may be on the average true, but that doesn't
mean it's always true. And that's one thing you
have to be careful of. that you're getting too
prejudiced about your own certain group's
capabilities compared to other people's
capabilities. Because there's just an awful lot
of smart people in the world. Huh? That's true.
There really are. Especially we have 200 million
of them now. And if you take the top 1%, which isn't
getting to be bad, well, there's 2 million people
like that. So it's sort of interesting.
which you were the happiest with or the proudest of
in your career, what would you choose?
Gee, I guess, let's
see, I'm not sure. I was really happy when we found
that bomb.
It was a matter of luck, partially, more than
skill. Perseverance, I guess. That was a very
happy time. You really felt that you'd done
something.
Well, that sort of justified the whole thing of
having Alvin. That said, no matter how much we'd
spent on Alvin, right then it was all worth it. So
that was nice, because there was a lot of people
saying, well, you can't do anything with that.
It'll never be useful. So that was probably one of
the nicest things that happened.
Since then, not much has happened. Very exciting.
That really wasn't very exciting, but it sure was
nice.
Have there been any, a second question of this
kind, have there been any sorts of discoveries in
oceanography which have come as a shock to you in
the last 10 or 15 years, something unexpected?
Not really. I guess if you look out this harbor and
watch the water moving there and just this harbor
alone, it's very complicated. And you'd expect
things like this to happen everywhere. So when
people find new currents or big eddies or things
like that, in a way, you're not surprised because
it's complicated. You know what happens in the
atmosphere to a reasonable extent. It's not
surprising that the same type of things happen in
the ocean column. The geology, of course, is this
nifty thing about the sea floor spreading with the
magnetics flipping. Now, that's quite a
surprise. That, I suppose, is probably really the
biggest surprise. And I would say that is
probably, we're thinking about it, the fact that
the Earth's field is flipped the way that it has and
then recorded itself so nicely is really a major
thing. I think that's, I would say that's the
biggest surprise. The fact that the, well, Wagner
wrote a book about seafloor spreading and so on. A
lot of people have looked at that and said, well,
something's happening there. So the fact that
that has been more or less proven is very nice, but
it didn't come as much as a surprise. But the way it
was proven is a neat thing, I think. That's really
nifty.
I don't know this. Well, the Japanese claimed to
have dredged up a few weeks ago and then threw back
in. That's a real winner. That was the biggest
surprise of all. Why did it go back in? Well, it
smelled. That's very simple. If you're on the ship
with it, I suppose it'd be easy to see that. I guess
that would be the biggest one. I can't think of
anything. If you were offering advice to a
student, who was going to be a prospective
oceanographer, what would you say should be where
he should direct his energies presently? I don't
want to use the word glamour fields or hot topics,
but which direction do you think oceanography is
going to go in terms of development? Well, it's
going to go a bunch of ways. And the one to go into is
the one that you're most interested in.
Regardless of whether it looks like the best or
not, because you'll probably do better in that one
than if you try to pick out the one you think is going
to be the most expansive. It depends on what you're
looking for, I guess. Certainly in biology,
there's an enormous field opening up. But it's
also very, very competitive. The ocean
engineering business of actually using Getting
things out of the ocean is going to be a big field,
but it's hard to guess how rapidly that's going to
move. That's a tricky business. Technology
limitation? Technology limitation. And
knowledge about what's there is another
limitation. We just haven't quite reached the
position on that. You know, the petroleum is one
problem, and that's pretty well. Well, we're not
even sure how much petroleum we have, but we have
good schemes of doing that. The other things that
are in there, we're not sure about.
I think it's really a matter of interest, rather
than what the hot fields are going to be for people
in our sort of standard. I think the one that people
agree here most of is that you want to get an
undergraduate training in a hard science, or at
least a rigorous undergraduate training,
regardless of what it's in. Because I think no
matter what it does, if you do a good hard job, why?
You're going to be able to go on and do something
else better. If you start diverging too soon,
learning too many facts without getting hard on
one of them, you're not going to do as well. There
are always exceptions to anything you say. I think
most of the people at the institution feel that
way. If you're going to be a biologist, you should
study biology and maybe read about the
oceanography part of it, but not do it until you get
into graduate school. Same for physics or
engineering, any of those.